Updated Weak Subjectivity Calculations (#2190)
ethereum/eth2.0-specs: specs/phase0/weak-subjectivity.md

### Calculating the Weak Subjectivity Period

> A detailed analysis of the calculation of the weak subjectivity period is made in [this report](https://github.com/runtimeverification/beacon-chain-verification/blob/master/weak-subjectivity/weak-subjectivity-analysis.pdf). The expressions in the report use fractions, whereas we only use uint64 arithmetic in eth2.0-specs. The expressions have been simplified to avoid computing fractions, and more details can be found [here](https://www.overleaf.com/read/wgjzjdjpvpsd).

Author: @djrtwo Is this a good way to link these external documents in the spec?

Reviewer: yep, fine to me

### Calculating the Weak Subjectivity Period

A detailed analysis of the calculation of the weak subjectivity period is made in [this report](https://github.com/runtimeverification/beacon-chain-verification/blob/master/weak-subjectivity/weak-subjectivity-analysis.pdf).

*Note*: The expressions in the report use fractions, whereas eth2.0-specs uses only `uint64` arithmetic. The expressions have been simplified to avoid computing fractions, and more details can be found [here](https://www.overleaf.com/read/wgjzjdjpvpsd).

> *Note*: The calculations here use `Ether` instead of `Gwei`, because the large magitude of balances in `Gwei` can cause an overflow while computing using `uint64` arithmetic operations. Using `Ether` reduces the magintude of the multiplicative factors by an order of `ETH_TO_GWEI` (`= 10**9`) and avoid the scope for overflows in `uint64`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*Note*: The calculations here use `Ether` instead of `Gwei`, because the large magnitude of balances in `Gwei` can cause an overflow while computing using `uint64` arithmetic operations. Using `Ether` reduces the magnitude of the multiplicative factors by an order of `ETH_TO_GWEI` (`= 10**9`) and avoid the scope for overflows in `uint64`.
```

### Calculating the Weak Subjectivity Period

A detailed analysis of the calculation of the weak subjectivity period is made in [this report](https://github.com/runtimeverification/beacon-chain-verification/blob/master/weak-subjectivity/weak-subjectivity-analysis.pdf). The expressions in the report use fractions, whereas we only use uint64 arithmetic in eth2.0-specs. The expressions have been simplified to avoid computing fractions, and more details can be found [here](https://www.overleaf.com/read/wgjzjdjpvpsd).

#### `get_active_validator_count`

```python

> def get_active_validator_count(state: BeaconState) -> uint64:

Reviewer: Probably don't need this helper. It's a quick one liner

>     active_validator_count = len(get_active_validator_indices(state, get_current_epoch(state)))

Reviewer: prefer one liner

```
return len(get_active_validator_indices(state, get_current_epoch(state)))
```

    return active_validator_count
```

#### `compute_avg_active_validator_balance`

```python
def compute_avg_active_validator_balance(state: BeaconState) -> Ether:
    total_active_balance = get_total_active_balance(state)

>     active_validator_count = get_active_validator_count(state)

Reviewer: I would collapse into one or two lines
```python
     return get_total_active_balance(state) // get_active_validator_count(state) // ETH_TO_GWEI
```

    avg_active_validator_balance_gwei = total_active_balance // active_validator_count
    avg_active_validator_balance_eth = avg_active_validator_balance_gwei // ETH_TO_GWEI
    return avg_active_validator_balance_eth
```

#### `compute_weak_subjectivity_period`

```python
def compute_weak_subjectivity_period(state: BeaconState) -> uint64:

>     ws_period = MIN_VALIDATOR_WITHDRAWABILITY_DELAY

Reviewer: Why is calculation carried out in ETH? Is this necessary?

Author: Doing this in `Gwei` leads to an overflow in the underlying `uint64` because of the large multiplicative factors. Calculating in `Ether` reduces the magnitude by an order of `ETH_TO_GWEI = 10**9`, thereby avoiding the overflow conditions.

Author: Added note in the spec to clarify this

>     ws_period = MIN_VALIDATOR_WITHDRAWABILITY_DELAY

Reviewer: This function is a bit opaque. Add a header comment to this function to give a bit of explanation and link to the external reference

    N = get_active_validator_count(state)
    t = compute_avg_active_validator_balance(state)
    T = MAX_EFFECTIVE_BALANCE // 10**9
    delta = get_validator_churn_limit(state)
    Delta = MAX_DEPOSITS * SLOTS_PER_EPOCH
    D = SAFETY_DECAY

    case = (

>         T * (200 + 3 * D) < t * (200 + 12 * D)

Reviewer: `T * (200 + 3 * D)` and `t * (200 + 12 * D)` are reused. Is there maybe a high level var name that would make these more descriptive?

Author: These terms don't correspond to any real-world factor as such, so I think it's best to use them raw in every instance. This also makes it easier to compare the code to the mathematical expressions in the WS report.

    )

>     if case == 1:

Reviewer: Why `case == 1`? Can't we just do this in line?

```python
if T * (200 + 3 * D) < t * (200 + 12 * D):
```

>         arg1 = (

Reviewer: Is there a more descriptive name that `arg1` and `arg2`?

            N * (t * (200 + 12 * D) - T * (200 + 3 * D)) // (600 * delta * (2 * t + T))
        )
        arg2 = (
            N * (200 + 3 * D) // (600 * Delta)
        )
        ws_period += max(arg1, arg2)
    else:
        ws_period += (
            3 * N * D * t // (200 * Delta * (T - t))
        )
    
    return ws_period
```

A brief reference for what these values look like in practice:

> | Safety Decay | Validator Count | Average Active Validator Balance | Weak Subjectivity Period |

Reviewer: Is this in epochs?

Author: Will update table headings for clarity!

| ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- |
| 10 | 8192 | 28 | 318 |
| 10 | 8192 | 32 | 358 |
| 10 | 16384 | 28 | 380 |
| 10 | 16384 | 32 | 460 |
| 10 | 32768 | 28 | 504 |
| 10 | 32768 | 32 | 665 |
| 20 | 8192 | 28 | 411 |
| 20 | 8192 | 32 | 460 |
| 20 | 16384 | 28 | 566 |
| 20 | 16384 | 32 | 665 |
| 20 | 32768 | 28 | 876 |
| 20 | 32768 | 32 | 1075 |
| 33 | 8192 | 28 | 532 |
| 33 | 8192 | 32 | 593 |
| 33 | 16384 | 28 | 808 |
| 33 | 16384 | 32 | 931 |
| 33 | 32768 | 28 | 1360 |

> | 33 | 32768 | 32 | 1607 |

Reviewer: I recommend less granularity on the low end and adding some much larger numbers. We're already at 70k active vals and less 16k doesn't seem likely *ever*
